# Round 2: Consecutive Primes

## Problem description

A pair of consecutive primes would be two prime numbers that have no other prime between them. The idea of consecutive primes can be extended to any number "k", in which there are only k primes between and including the smallest and largest primes of the ordered set. We would refer to this set as a "k-pair". Two examples of 3-consecutive prime sets would be [29, 31, 37] and [11083, 11087, 11093].

Write a threaded code to find the sum of all possible "k-pair" consecutive prime number sets and determine if their sum is a perfect power. For example, given p1, p2, and p3 are consecutive primes, the sum of these primes is N (= p1 + p2 + p3). A number N is a perfect power if N = n^m, with n, m >= 2 (i.e., N is a perfect square, perfect cube, etc.). Input to the application will be from the command line, which will include the range of numbers from which primes will be recruited and the highest exponent (m) the application will need to consider. Output of the application will be the sets of consecutive primes that are added together resulting in a perfect power value.

## Input description

The input to the program will be from the command line as three integers. The first and second integers will be the start and the end, inclusive, of the range from which prime numbers must be used. The third command line parameter is the maximum power m, which the application must use to compute perfect powers. The input values will be represented with 32-bit unsigned integers. The fourth parameter on the command-line would be the name of the text file to hold the output.

Example command line: `./primesums 1 29 6 sumsout.txt`z

## Output description

The output to be generated by the application is a list of consecutive primes and the perfect power that is the sum of those primes. To shorten the output, only the first and last prime of the consecutive primes need be printed. The sum and how the sum is a perfect prime must be printed. Output for the application will be stored in the text file specified as the fourth parameter on the command line. If there are no consecutive prime sums (within the input range) that equal a perfect power (within the exponent range), then a message to state that fact should be written to the output file.

Example output file:
```
sum(3:5) = 8 = 2**3
sum(17:19) = 36 = 6**2
sum(2:23) = 100 = 10**2
sum(13:19) = 49 = 7**2
sum(5:13) = 36 = 6**2
```

## Key files in this directory

* [**Rick LaMont's original submission**](main.cpp) placed first.
* [**Miguel Fernandez's original submission**](jmfernandez.cpp).

Rick's submission depends on helper files [primes.cpp](primes.cpp), [powers.cpp](powers.cpp), [searches.cpp](searches.cpp), and [output.cpp](output.cpp).

## Notes on scoring

Full scoring was as follows:
* 75 points for submitting an entry
* 25 points for not cheating by using a precomputed table of primes
* 25 points for posting 5 or more comments in the contest forums
* 6 points for each test case where correct results were produced
* 10 points for fastest correct program on each test case. Non-first place entries scored on a linear scale based on speed relative to first place entry.

Rick LaMont earned a perfect score of 285, with a wide enough margin to vault from seventh to first place overall. In second place with 202.09 points was round 1 winner "VoVanx86", keeping the pressure on for an exciting finish in round 3.

## Rick LaMont's contemporaneous developer's blog

**5/13/2011:**
The second round is pretty boring and I do expect to win. It's a math problem: sums of consecutive primes, perfect powers, *yawns*. I got an early start and totally figured this thing out. It's getting linear speedup in the multicore lab: 32 threads solve the problem twice as fast as 16 do.

**6/14/2011:**
The second round (Consecutive Primes) has closed and I like my chances for winning it. More about that below. It may be awhile before we know the outcome because they still haven't finished judging the first round.

The rest of this message will be technical. Read on only if you understand programming and/or want a rare glimpse of my source code.

The problem I had to solve is simple to describe. Consider a run of k consecutive primes, such as [11083, 11087, 11093]. Is their sum a perfect power? (A number n is a perfect power if it can be expressed as n = mx where m and x are natural numbers greater than 1.) For example, 2 + 3 + 5 + 7 + 11 + 13 + 17 + 19 + 23 = 100 which is a perfect power because 102 = 100. Got it?

My program took as input two 32-bit integers representing the start and end of a range to consider. It then had to find all possible sub-runs of consecutive primes in the range that sum to a perfect power. For example, on the input [1, 29] it would print (in no particular order):
```
sum(3:5) = 8 = 2^3
sum(17:19) = 36 = 6^2
sum(2:23) = 100 = 10^2
sum(13:19) = 49 = 7^2
sum(5:13) = 36 = 6^2
```
So right away there's an O(n^2) complexity going on. For any full run of n consecutive primes there are (n^2 - n)/2 sub-runs contained within. [Note: They refer to this sum(x,y) notation as a "k-pair" where the pair are the bounds (x, y) and k is the number of consecutive primes in the run, including x and y.]

I broke the problem down into four tasks:
1. Generate primes in the range
2. Calculate sums of runs
3. Generate perfect powers in range of the sums
4. Find matches between the sums and the powers

Sieve of Eratosthenes is an efficient algorithm for generating the first primes up to 10 million. Unfortunately I had to go up to 4.3 billion (2^32) in the worst case. Also, I didn't need the primes below the start of the range. I ended up using the Miller-Rabin test. Instead of choosing random numbers (the way this algorithm usually works!) I used the basis {2, 7, and 61} because it's guaranteed to be correct up to 4.7 billion.

Step 2 is more interesting than it sounds. Instead of storing the raw prime numbers in a table and summing them up as needed, I processed the primes into a prefix sum table. To recover the original prime number at index i, use sum[i+1] - sum[i]. That's inconvenient but you get something big in return. The sum of any sequence of primes from index i to j is given by sum[j+1] - sum[i]. Beauty!

From what I gather on the contest forums, many competitors skipped step 3 and headed right into the search. Big mistake! They were trying to use math to solve the problem backwards, "I take the sum and calculate its nth root and see if that's an integer. Then I repeat for all values of n." That's a fool's errand. It's fast to build a table of perfect powers using an integer `pow(m, x)` function and a priority queue to keep them sorted. Hell, I assigned 39 threads to step 1 and only one thread to step 3 and it still finished first.

Step 4 is where the contest will be won or lost. On a big problem of a hundred million primes, steps 1 through 3 take one second and step 4 takes 15 minutes. Seriously.

I wrote five different search strategies only to throw four of them away when the other one emerged as the fastest on all inputs. I called it the "stride strategy". Each thread would take a stride of length k, starting with k=2. It would look at all runs of k consecutive primes from the beginning of the range to the end. The cool thing about this is that the sums gradually grow larger as you move downrange. Since the power table is also sorted, I can keep an index into it and do short linear searches (usually no more than 2 steps) for values that match the current sum.

That's about it other than multi-threading issues such as load balancing. There was one astonishing result: frequent barriers caused the program to run faster! The stride strategy has excellent cache coherency as long as all of the threads run together as a pack. If one thread fell behind (perhaps to output results) then I'd see some cache thrashing. So I added a "metronome" to resynchronize the threads. The optimum time between resyncs: 600 milliseconds. I was expecting it to be closer to a minute.

**6/17/2011:**
Regarding "That's a fool's errand", what's worse is that they were trying to use the Standard C Library's double precision floating point math functions to calculate the integer nth root of an integer [there is no nroot function per se but one can use `pow(x, 1.0/n)` or `exp(ln(x) / n)`]. This is the worst of both worlds: slow and imprecise. It's slow because the math functions will calculate it out to the full 64 bit precision even if it's clear from the first few bits that the answer will not be an integer (e.g. 3.5490.... is not converging to an integer). Imprecise because even double precision floats can't represent all integers exactly. If the answer is 5.000000000001 is that an integer? Ceilings and floors don't help. The best way to know for sure is to turn around and double check if `pow(x, k) = n`.

Also, they were talking about checking the nth root for all values of n from 2 to 64. Practically the only thing Wikipedia has to say on the subject of detecting perfect powers is that you only have to consider exponents that are prime. Maybe these guys knew that and were playing it close to the vest for competitive advantage.

In all honesty, one of the five strategies I implemented and ultimately rejected was a mathematical perfect power detector. It wasn't my first approach but it was definitely the hardest work. I implemented the algorithms outlined in the paper *Detecting Perfect Powers in Essentially Linear Time* by Daniel J. Bernstein. It calculates nth roots a few bits at a time and aborts when the answer is clearly not going to be an integer. My thought was that it might scale better because it's CPU bound rather than memory bound like my table-based search strategies. No dice. It was by far the slowest of the five strategies (which is no offense to Mr. Bernstein - his paper is geared toward BigInts for which power tables would be impractical).

**8/3/2011:**
The results are in for round 2 of my programming contest. I won first place! Not only that, I won by such a wide margin that I've taken the overall lead toward the grand prize. All that stands between me and that trip to San Francisco is round 3, which I expect to win handily.

Round 2 was the math problem about consecutive primes and perfect powers. A perfect score for round 2 would be 285 points. I received 285 points - a perfect score. Here's the breakdown:

* 75 points for submitting an entry
* 25 points for not cheating by using a precomputed table of primes (it was tempting...)
* 25 points for posting 5 or more comments in the contest forums
* 60 points for producing the correct results on all six test cases
* 100 points for having the fastest correct program on every test case

The contestant who finished in second place got 202.09 points. He happens to be the same person who won first place in round 1. That's bad news for me because it means he's hanging in there as a contender. Where I once trailed him by 26.62 I now lead by 56.29 in overall points thanks to my strong showing in round 2.

Once again the judges used disappointingly small test cases. My program correctly solved all of them in 19 to 55 milliseconds. Three different contestants took turns coming in second place to me over the course of the six tests. On average, the second place program took 3.7 times longer than mine did to come up with the correct result.

Barring a catastrophic failure in round 3 (such as the judges not receiving my submission) I think this contest is in the bag.
